{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\ftnbj \deff0\deflang1033\delangfe1033\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
{\fonttbl
{\f1\fnil\fprq2 Courier New;}
{\f2\fnil\fprq2 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fprq2 Times New Roman;}
{\f4\fnil\fprq2 Charis SIL;}
{\f5\fnil\fprq2 Courier;}
{\f6\fnil\fprq2 Doulos SIL;}
{\f7\fnil\fprq2 MV Boli;}
{\f8\fnil\fprq2 SimSun;}
{\f9\fnil\fprq2 FieldWorks Test SIL;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s44\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext15 Attribution;}
{\s97\qc\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\i\sbasedon1\snext7 Caption;}
{\s28\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\sbasedon5\snext7 Chapter Head;}
{\s13\fi-480\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext14 Citation Line1;}
{\s14\fi-480\lin960\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon13\snext13 Citation Line2;}
{\s9\lin240\rin240\sb240\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext9 Citation Paragraph;}
{\s22\qr\sb240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext7 Closing;}
{\s41\fi240\sb240\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\b\sbasedon7\snext7 Congregational Response;}
{\s87\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\i\sbasedon7\snext7 Cross-Reference;}
{\s83\qc\sb240\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext15 Doxology;}
{\s23\lin240\rin240\sb240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon19\snext7 Embedded Text Closing;}
{\s36\ql\fi-720\lin960\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon19\snext38 Embedded Text Line1;}
{\s38\fi-480\lin960\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon36\snext36 Embedded Text Line2;}
{\s47\fi-240\lin960\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon36\snext36 Embedded Text Line3;}
{\s21\lin240\rin240\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon19\snext19 Embedded Text Opening;}
{\s19\fi240\lin240\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext7 Embedded Text Paragraph;}
{\s37\lin240\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon19\snext19 Embedded Text Paragraph Continuation;}
{\s43\qr\lin240\rin240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon19\snext19 Embedded Text Refrain;}
{\s94\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon1\snext7 Header;}
{\s18\qc\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs16\sbasedon15\snext15 Hebrew Title;}
{\s73\qc\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext7 Inscription Paragraph;}
{\s45\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\i\sbasedon15\snext15 Interlude;}
{\s11\ql\fi-480\lin720\rin240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon53\snext12 Intro Citation Line1;}
{\s12\fi-240\lin720\rin240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon11\snext11 Intro Citation Line2;}
{\s10\lin240\rin240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon53\snext10 Intro Citation Paragraph;}
{\s96\qr\rin240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon53\snext53 Intro Cross-Reference;}
{\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon53\snext59 Intro List Item1;}
{\s90\fi-480\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon59\snext59 Intro List Item2;}
{\s93\fi-240\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon59\snext59 Intro List Item3;}
{\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18\sbasedon7\snext53 Intro Paragraph;}
{\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b\sbasedon5\snext53 Intro Section Head;}
{\s15\ql\fi-720\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext16 Line1;}
{\s16\fi-480\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext15 Line2;}
{\s46\fi-240\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext15 Line3;}
{\s60\fi-480\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext60 List Item1;}
{\s61\fi240\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon60\snext61 List Item1 Additional;}
{\s91\fi-480\lin960\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon60\snext91 List Item2;}
{\s62\fi240\lin960\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon91\snext62 List Item2 Additional;}
{\s92\fi-480\lin1200\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon60\snext60 List Item3;}
{\s1\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\snext7 Normal;}
{\s98\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext103 Notation Author;}
{\s99\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext99 Notation Date;}
{\s100\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext100 Notation Date Created;}
{\s101\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext101 Notation Date Modified;}
{\s102\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext102 Notation Date Resolved;}
{\s103\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext103 Notation Discussion;}
{\s104\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext104 Notation Quote;}
{\s105\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext105 Notation Resolution;}
{\s106\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon17\snext106 Notation Suggestion;}
{\s35\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16\sbasedon34\snext35 Note Cross-Reference Paragraph;}
{\s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16\sbasedon7\snext34 Note General Paragraph;}
{\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon1\snext7 Paragraph;}
{\s8\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext7 Paragraph Continuation;}
{\s31\qc\sb-80\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\i\sbasedon5\snext7 Parallel Passage Reference;}
{\s42\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\i\sbasedon15\snext15 Refrain;}
{\s17\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon1\snext17 Remark;}
{\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\sbasedon1\snext7 Section Head;}
{\s25\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\sbasedon5\snext5 Section Head Major;}
{\s24\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\i\sbasedon5\snext7 Section Head Minor;}
{\s95\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\sbasedon5\snext95 Section Head Series;}
{\s50\qc\sb-80\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\sbasedon5\snext50 Section Range Paragraph;}
{\s39\fi-720\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext40 Speech Line1;}
{\s40\fi-480\lin720\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon39\snext39 Speech Line2;}
{\s27\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\i\sbasedon5\snext39 Speech Speaker;}
{\s20\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon15\snext15 Stanza Break;}
{\s55\ql\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext55 Table Cell;}
{\s57\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\b\sbasedon55\snext57 Table Cell Head;}
{\s58\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\b\sbasedon57\snext54 Table Cell Head Last;}
{\s56\qr\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon55\snext54 Table Cell Last;}
{\s54\ql\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext55 Table Row;}
{\s6\qc\sb720\sa240\sl-480\slmult0\f4\fs40\b\sbasedon5\snext6 Title Main;}
{\s82\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\sbasedon7\snext82 Variant Paragraph;}
{\s48\qc\sb240\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\brdrt\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20\brdrcf1\sbasedon5\snext7 Variant Section Head;}
{\s49\qc\sa240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20\brdrcf1\sbasedon48\snext5 Variant Section Tail;}
{\*\cs78\additive Abbreviation;}
{\*\cs29\i\additive Alluded Text;}
{\*\cs51\b\additive Alternate Reading;}
{\*\cs81\i\additive Book Title In Text;}
{\*\cs86\additive Canonical Reference;}
{\*\cs2\additive Chapter Number;}
{\*\cs3\additive Chapter Number Alternate;}
{\*\cs75\i\additive Emphasis;}
{\*\cs80\i\additive Foreign;}
{\*\cs63\additive Gloss;}
{\*\cs64\i\additive Hand;}
{\*\cs108\additive Hyperlink;}
{\*\cs74\additive Inscription;}
{\*\cs66\additive Key Word;}
{\*\cs67\i\additive Label;}
{\*\cs68\additive Mentioned;}
{\*\cs72\additive Name Of God;}
{\*\cs107\b\fs18\additive Notation Tag;}
{\*\cs33\b\super\additive Note Marker;}
{\*\cs32\b\additive Note Target Reference;}
{\*\cs79\super\additive Ordinal Number Ending;}
{\*\cs30\b\i\additive Quoted Text;}
{\*\cs52\b\additive Referenced Text;}
{\*\cs65\additive See In Glossary;}
{\*\cs69\additive So Called;}
{\*\cs70\i\additive Supplied;}
{\*\cs84\fs28\additive Title Secondary;}
{\*\cs85\fs24\additive Title Tertiary;}
{\*\cs76\b\additive Untranslated Word;}
{\*\cs71\i\additive Variant;}
{\*\cs4\super\additive Verse Number;}
{\*\cs89\super\additive Verse Number Alternate;}
{\*\cs88\super\additive Verse Number In Note;}
{\*\cs77\additive Words Of Christ;}
}
\pard\plain\s6\qc\sb720\sa240\sl-480\slmult0\f4\fs40\b{E\uc0\u769 PI\uc0\u770 TRE A\uc0\u768  PHILE\uc0\u769 MON\line }
{\*\cs84\fs28 INTRODUCTION}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{De toutes les lettres de Paul parvenues jusqu'a\uc0\u768  nous, l'Epi\uc0\u770 tre a\uc0\u768  Phile\uc0\u769 mon est la plus bre\uc0\u768 ve, la plus personnelle aussi. Pour autant, elle n'est pas une <<lettre prive\uc0\u769 e>>. Paul s'adresse en effet aussi a\uc0\u768  l'<<Eglise qui s'assemble dans la maison de Phile\uc0\u769 mon>> (v. 2).}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{C'est sans doute de Rome ou de Ce\uc0\u769 sare\uc0\u769 e que Paul e\uc0\u769 crit cette lettre. Elle est en tout cas contemporaine de l'e\uc0\u769 pi\uc0\u770 tre aux Colossiens: Paul est alors prisonnier (Col 4.3,10,18; Phm 9,10,13,18) et se trouve entoure\uc0\u769  des me\uc0\u770 mes compagnons (Col 3.7-14; Phm 23-24). Phile\uc0\u769 mon est un converti de Paul (v. 19), et Paul l'appelle <<son bien-aime\uc0\u769  collaborateur>> (v. 1).}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Circonstances}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Les circonstances de la lettre demeurent quelque peu obscures. Il semble qu'One\uc0\u769 sime, esclave de Phile\uc0\u769 mon, se soit enfui de chez son mai\uc0\u770 tre et ait trouve\uc0\u769  refuge aupre\uc0\u768 s de Paul, qui s'est attache\uc0\u769  a\uc0\u768  lui et en a fait son collaborateur. Il l'appelle <<ce fre\uc0\u768 re fide\uc0\u768 le et tre\uc0\u768 s cher>> (Col 4.9). Peut-e\uc0\u770 tre pour des raisons juridiques, Paul s'est de\uc0\u769 cide\uc0\u769  a\uc0\u768  renvoyer One\uc0\u769 sime a\uc0\u768  son mai\uc0\u770 tre. Mais en me\uc0\u770 me temps, il adresse a\uc0\u768  Phile\uc0\u769 mon ce billet dans lequel il le prie d'accueillir l'esclave non seulement comme <<un fre\uc0\u768 re bien-aime\uc0\u769 >> mais, plus encore, comme si c'e\uc0\u769 tait Paul lui-me\uc0\u770 me (v. 17). Paul ne demande pas en termes expre\uc0\u768 s a\uc0\u768  Phile\uc0\u769 mon d'affranchir One\uc0\u769 sime, mais il ne doute pas que Phile\uc0\u769 mon fera plus encore qu'il ne lui est demande\uc0\u769  (v. 21).}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Inte\uc0\u769 re\uc0\u770 t doctrinal}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Les divers passages ou\uc0\u768  Paul, dans ses e\uc0\u769 pi\uc0\u770 tres, aborde le proble\uc0\u768 me des relations entre les mai\uc0\u770 tres et les esclaves peuvent parai\uc0\u770 tre timides (1 Co 7.20-24; Ep 6.5-9; Col 3.22 - 4.1). S'il assure bien que, dans le Christ, toutes les frontie\uc0\u768 res sont abolies, qu'il n'y a plus <<ni esclave ni homme libre>> (Ga 3.28), il semble n'en tirer aucune conse\uc0\u769 quence sur le plan exte\uc0\u769 rieur et juridique, celui de la vie civile.}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{L'Epi\uc0\u770 tre a\uc0\u768  Phile\uc0\u769 mon interdit toutefois une interpre\uc0\u769 tation dualiste de la pense\uc0\u769 e de Paul, et c'est son originalite\uc0\u769 . Comme le rele\uc0\u768 ve The\uc0\u769 o Preiss: <<En fait, Paul ne juxtapose pas du tout le spirituel et le social: la fraternite\uc0\u769 , l'unite\uc0\u769  en Christ, s'empare pluto\uc0\u770 t de cette relation mai\uc0\u770 tre-esclave, la brise et l'accomplit sur un tout autre plan. One\uc0\u769 sime sera conside\uc0\u769 re\uc0\u769 , non seulement comme un e\uc0\u769 gal, un autre membre de la famille de Phile\uc0\u769 mon, il sera pleinement fre\uc0\u768 re. Il ne reste donc aucune marge de paternalisme: ce sera une totale fraternite\uc0\u769 .>>}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Si le Nouveau Testament n'est pas re\uc0\u769 volutionnaire, il ne saurait e\uc0\u770 tre qualifie\uc0\u769  de conservateur: tout ordre social se trouve radicalement mis en question par l'Evangile du Christ et son message d'amour.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 1}
{Paul, prisonnier de Je\uc0\u769 sus Christ et Timothe\uc0\u769 e, le fre\uc0\u768 re, a\uc0\u768  Phile\uc0\u769 mon, notre bien-aime\uc0\u769  collaborateur, }
{\*\cs4\super 2}
{et a\uc0\u768  Apphia, notre soeur, et a\uc0\u768  Archippe, notre compagnon d'armes, et a\uc0\u768  l'Eglise qui s'assemble dans ta maison. }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{A vous gra\uc0\u770 ce et paix, de la part de Dieu notre Pe\uc0\u768 re et du Seigneur Je\uc0\u769 sus Christ.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 4}
{Je rends gra\uc0\u770 ce a\uc0\u768  mon Dieu en faisant continuellement mention de toi dans mes prie\uc0\u768 res, }
{\*\cs4\super 5}
{car j'entends parler de l'amour et de la foi que tu as envers le Seigneur Je\uc0\u769 sus et en faveur de tous les saints. }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{Que ta participation a\uc0\u768  la foi soit efficace: fais donc connai\uc0\u770 tre tout le bien que nous pouvons accomplir pour la cause du Christ. }
{\*\cs4\super 7}
{Grande joie et consolation m'ont de\uc0\u769 ja\uc0\u768  e\uc0\u769 te\uc0\u769  apporte\uc0\u769 es: par ton amour, fre\uc0\u768 re, tu as re\uc0\u769 conforte\uc0\u769  le coeur des saints.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 8}
{Aussi, bien que j'aie, en Christ, toute liberte\uc0\u769  de te prescrire ton devoir, }
{\*\cs4\super 9}
{c'est de pre\uc0\u769 fe\uc0\u769 rence au nom de l'amour que je t'adresse une reque\uc0\u770 te. Oui, moi Paul, qui suis un vieillard, moi qui suis maintenant prisonnier de Je\uc0\u769 sus Christ, }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{je te prie pour mon enfant, celui que j'ai engendre\uc0\u769  en prison, One\uc0\u769 sime, }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{qui jadis t'a e\uc0\u769 te\uc0\u769  inutile et qui, maintenant, nous est utile, a\uc0\u768  toi comme a\uc0\u768  moi. }
{\*\cs4\super 12}
{Je te le renvoie, lui qui est comme mon propre coeur. }
{\*\cs4\super 13}
{Je l'aurais volontiers garde\uc0\u769  pre\uc0\u768 s de moi, afin qu'il me serve a\uc0\u768  ta place dans la prison ou\uc0\u768  je suis a\uc0\u768  cause de l'Evangile; }
{\*\cs4\super 14}
{mais je n'ai rien voulu faire sans ton accord, afin que ce bienfait n'ait pas l'air force\uc0\u769 , mais qu'il vienne de ton bon gre\uc0\u769 . }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{Peut-e\uc0\u770 tre One\uc0\u769 sime n'a-t-il e\uc0\u769 te\uc0\u769  se\uc0\u769 pare\uc0\u769  de toi pour un temps qu'afin de t'e\uc0\u770 tre rendu pour l'e\uc0\u769 ternite\uc0\u769 , }
{\*\cs4\super 16}
{non plus comme un esclave mais comme bien mieux qu'un esclave: un fre\uc0\u768 re bien-aime\uc0\u769 . Il l'est tellement pour moi, combien plus le sera-t-il pour toi, et en tant qu'homme et en tant que chre\uc0\u769 tien.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 17}
{Si donc tu me tiens pour ton fre\uc0\u768 re en la foi, rec\uc0\u807 ois-le comme si c'e\uc0\u769 tait moi. }
{\*\cs4\super 18}
{Et s'il t'a fait quelque tort ou s'il a quelque dette envers toi, porte cela a\uc0\u768  mon compte. }
{\*\cs4\super 19}
{- C'est moi, Paul, qui l'e\uc0\u769 cris de ma propre main: c'est moi qui paierai... Et je ne te rappelle pas que toi, tu as aussi une dette envers moi, et c'est toi-me\uc0\u770 me! }
{\*\cs4\super 20}
{Allons, fre\uc0\u768 re, rends-moi ce service dans le Seigneur; donne a\uc0\u768  mon coeur son re\uc0\u769 confort en Christ! }
{\*\cs4\super 21}
{C'est en me fiant a\uc0\u768  ton obe\uc0\u769 issance que je t'e\uc0\u769 cris: je sais que tu feras plus encore que je ne dis.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 22}
{En me\uc0\u770 me temps, pre\uc0\u769 pare-moi un logement: j'espe\uc0\u768 re en effet, gra\uc0\u770 ce a\uc0\u768  vos prie\uc0\u768 res, vous e\uc0\u770 tre rendu. }
{\*\cs4\super 23}
{Epaphras, mon compagnon de captivite\uc0\u769  en Je\uc0\u769 sus Christ, te salue, }
{\*\cs4\super 24}
{ainsi que Marc, Aristarque, De\uc0\u769 mas et Luc, mes collaborateurs. }
{\*\cs4\super 25}
{La gra\uc0\u770 ce du Seigneur Je\uc0\u769 sus Christ soit avec vous.}
\par\pard\plain\s6\qc\sb720\sa240\sl-480\slmult0\f4\fs40\b{\*\cs84\fs28 The Letter from}
{\line JAMES}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Introduction}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{\*\cs75\i The Letter from James}
{ is a collection of practical instructions, written to \uc0\u8220 all God's people scattered over the whole world.\uc0\u8221  The writer uses many vivid figures of speech to present instructions regarding practical wisdom and guidance for Christian attitudes and conduct. From the Christian perspective he deals with a variety of topics such as riches and poverty, temptation, good conduct, prejudice, faith and actions, the use of the tongue, wisdom, quarreling, pride and humility, judging others, boasting, patience, and prayer.}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{The letter emphasizes the importance of actions along with faith, in the practice of the Christian religion.}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Outline of Contents}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Introduction (1.1)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Faith and wisdom (1.2-8)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Poverty and wealth (1.9-11)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Testing and tempting (1.12-18)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Hearing and doing (1.19-27)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Warning against discrimination (2.1-13)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Faith and works (2.14-26)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{The Christian and his tongue (3.1-18)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{The Christian and the world (4.1\uc0\u8211 5.6)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Various instructions (5.7-20)}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 1}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{\*\cs33\b\super a}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{a}{- Mat 13.55; Mrk 6.3; Act 15.13; Gal 1.19.}}
{ From James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ:}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{Greetings to all God's people scattered over the whole world.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Faith and Wisdom}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 2}
{\*\cs33\b\super b}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{b}{- }}
{ My friends, consider yourselves fortunate when all kinds of trials come your way, }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{for you know that when your faith succeeds in facing such trials, the result is the ability to endure. }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{Make sure that your endurance carries you all the way without failing, so that you may be perfect and complete, lacking nothing. }
{\*\cs4\super 5}
{\*\cs33\b\super c}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{c}{- }}
{ But if any of you lack wisdom, you should pray to God, who will give it to you; because God gives generously and graciously to all. }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{But when you pray, you must believe and not doubt at all. Whoever doubts is like a wave in the sea that is driven and blown about by the wind. }
{\*\cs4\super 7-8}
{If you are like that, unable to make up your mind and undecided in all you do, you must not think that you will receive anything from the Lord.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Poverty and Riches}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 9}
{Those Christians who are poor must be glad when God lifts them up, }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{\*\cs33\b\super d}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{d}{- Isa 40.6,7 (LXX).}}
{ and the rich Christians must be glad when God brings them down. For the rich will pass away like the flower of a wild plant. }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{The sun rises with its blazing heat and burns the plant; its flower falls off, and its beauty is destroyed. In the same way the rich will be destroyed while they go about their business.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Testing and Tempting}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 12}
{Happy are those who remain faithful under trials, because when they succeed in passing such a test, they will receive as their reward the life which God has promised to those who love him. }
{\*\cs4\super 13}
{\*\cs33\b\super e}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{e}{- }}
{ If we are tempted by such trials, we must not say, \uc0\u8220 This temptation comes from God.\uc0\u8221  For God cannot be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one. }
{\*\cs4\super 14}
{But we are tempted when we are drawn away and trapped by our own evil desires. }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{Then our evil desires conceive and give birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 16}
{Do not be deceived, my dear friends! }
{\*\cs4\super 17}
{Every good gift and every perfect present comes from heaven; it comes down from God, the Creator of the heavenly lights, who does not change or cause darkness by turning. }
{\*\cs4\super 18}
{By his own will he brought us into being through the word of truth, so that we should have first place among all his creatures.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Hearing and Doing}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 19}
{\*\cs33\b\super f}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{f}{- }}
{ Remember this, my dear friends! Everyone must be quick to listen, but slow to speak and slow to become angry. }
{\*\cs4\super 20}
{Human anger does not achieve God's righteous purpose. }
{\*\cs4\super 21}
{So get rid of every filthy habit and all wicked conduct. Submit to God and accept the word that he plants in your hearts, which is able to save you.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 22}
{Do not deceive yourselves by just listening to his word; instead, put it into practice. }
{\*\cs4\super 23}
{If you listen to the word, but do not put it into practice you are like people who look in a mirror and see themselves as they are. }
{\*\cs4\super 24}
{They take a good look at themselves and then go away and at once forget what they look like. }
{\*\cs4\super 25}
{But if you look closely into the perfect law that sets people free, and keep on paying attention to it and do not simply listen and then forget it, but put it into practice\uc0\u8212 you will be blessed by God in what you do.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 26}
{Do any of you think you are religious? If you do not control your tongue, your religion is worthless and you deceive yourself. }
{\*\cs4\super 27}
{What God the Father considers to be pure and genuine religion is this: to take care of orphans and widows in their suffering and to keep oneself from being corrupted by the world.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Warning against Prejudice}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 2}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{My friends, as believers in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, you must never treat people in different ways according to their outward appearance. }
{\*\cs4\super 2}
{Suppose a rich man wearing a gold ring and fine clothes comes to your meeting, and a poor man in ragged clothes also comes. }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{If you show more respect to the well-dressed man and say to him, \uc0\u8220 Have this best seat here,\uc0\u8221  but say to the poor man, \uc0\u8220 Stand over there, or sit here on the floor by my feet,\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{then you are guilty of creating distinctions among yourselves and of making judgments based on evil motives.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 5}
{Listen, my dear friends! God chose the poor people of this world to be rich in faith and to possess the kingdom which he promised to those who love him. }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{But you dishonor the poor! Who are the ones who oppress you and drag you before the judges? The rich! }
{\*\cs4\super 7}
{They are the ones who speak evil of that good name which has been given to you.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 8}
{\*\cs33\b\super g}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{g}{- Lev 19.18.}}
{ You will be doing the right thing if you obey the law of the Kingdom, which is found in the scripture, \uc0\u8220 Love your neighbor as you love yourself.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 9}
{But if you treat people according to their outward appearance, you are guilty of sin, and the Law condemns you as a lawbreaker. }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{Whoever breaks one commandment is guilty of breaking them all. }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{\*\cs33\b\super h}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{h}{- a Exo 20.14; Deu 5.18; b Exo 20.13; Deu 5.17.}}
{ For the same one who said, \uc0\u8220 Do not commit adultery,\uc0\u8221  also said, \uc0\u8220 Do not commit murder.\uc0\u8221  Even if you do not commit adultery, you have become a lawbreaker if you commit murder. }
{\*\cs4\super 12}
{Speak and act as people who will be judged by the law that sets us free. }
{\*\cs4\super 13}
{For God will not show mercy when he judges the person who has not been merciful; but mercy triumphs over judgment.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Faith and Actions}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 14}
{My friends, what good is it for one of you to say that you have faith if your actions do not prove it? Can that faith save you? }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{Suppose there are brothers or sisters who need clothes and don't have enough to eat. }
{\*\cs4\super 16}
{What good is there in your saying to them, \uc0\u8220 God bless you! Keep warm and eat well!\uc0\u8221 \uc0\u8212 if you don't give them the necessities of life? }
{\*\cs4\super 17}
{So it is with faith: if it is alone and includes no actions, then it is dead.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 18}
{But someone will say, \uc0\u8220 One person has faith, another has actions.\uc0\u8221  My answer is, \uc0\u8220 Show me how anyone can have faith without actions. I will show you my faith by my actions.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 19}
{Do you believe that there is only one God? Good! The demons also believe\uc0\u8212 and tremble with fear. }
{\*\cs4\super 20}
{You fool! Do you want to be shown that faith without actions is useless? }
{\*\cs33\b\super i}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{i}{a }{\*\cs51\b useless; }{some manuscripts have }{\*\cs51\b dead.}}
{ }
{\*\cs4\super 21}
{\*\cs33\b\super j}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{j}{- Gen 22.1-14 }}
{ How was our ancestor Abraham put right with God? It was through his actions, when he offered his son Isaac on the altar. }
{\*\cs4\super 22}
{Can't you see? His faith and his actions worked together; his faith was made perfect through his actions. }
{\*\cs4\super 23}
{\*\cs33\b\super k}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{k}{- a Gen 15.6; b 2Ch 20.7; Isa 41.8.}}
{ And the scripture came true that said, \uc0\u8220 Abraham believed God, and because of his faith God accepted him as righteous.\uc0\u8221  And so Abraham was called God's friend. }
{\*\cs4\super 24}
{You see, then, that it is by our actions that we are put right with God, and not by our faith alone.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 25}
{\*\cs33\b\super l}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{l}{- Jas 2.1-21.}}
{ It was the same with the prostitute Rahab. She was put right with God through her actions, by welcoming the Israelite spies and helping them to escape by a different road.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 26}
{So then, as the body without the spirit is dead, also faith without actions is dead.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{The Tongue}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 3}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{My friends, not many of you should become teachers. As you know, we teachers will be judged with greater strictness than others. }
{\*\cs4\super 2}
{\*\cs33\b\super m}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{m}{- }}
{ All of us often make mistakes. But if a person never makes a mistake in what he says, he is perfect and is also able to control his whole being. }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{We put a bit into the mouth of a horse to make it obey us, and we are able to make it go where we want. }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{Or think of a ship: big as it is and driven by such strong winds, it can be steered by a very small rudder, and it goes wherever the pilot wants it to go. }
{\*\cs4\super 5}
{So it is with the tongue: small as it is, it can boast about great things.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{Just think how large a forest can be set on fire by a tiny flame! }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{\*\cs33\b\super n}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{n}{- }}
{ And the tongue is like a fire. It is a world of wrong, occupying its place in our bodies and spreading evil through our whole being. It sets on fire the entire course of our existence with the fire that comes to it from hell itself. }
{\*\cs4\super 7}
{We humans are able to tame and have tamed all other creatures\uc0\u8212 wild animals and birds, reptiles and fish. }
{\*\cs4\super 8}
{But no one has ever been able to tame the tongue. It is evil and uncontrollable, full of deadly poison. }
{\*\cs4\super 9}
{\*\cs33\b\super o}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{o}{- Gen 1.26.}}
{ We use it to give thanks to our Lord and Father and also to curse other people, who are created in the likeness of God. }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{Words of thanksgiving and cursing pour out from the same mouth. My friends, this should not happen! }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{No spring of water pours out sweet water and bitter water from the same opening. }
{\*\cs4\super 12}
{A fig tree, my friends, cannot bear olives; a grapevine cannot bear figs, nor can a salty spring produce sweet water.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{The Wisdom from Above}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 13}
{\*\cs33\b\super p}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{p}{- }}
{ Are there any of you who are wise and understanding? You are to prove it by your good life, by your good deeds performed with humility and wisdom. }
{\*\cs4\super 14}
{But if in your heart you are jealous, bitter, and selfish, don't sin against the truth by boasting of your wisdom. }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{Such wisdom does not come down from heaven; it belongs to the world, it is unspiritual and demonic. }
{\*\cs4\super 16}
{Where there is jealousy and selfishness, there is also disorder and every kind of evil. }
{\*\cs4\super 17}
{But the wisdom from above is pure first of all; it is also peaceful, gentle, and friendly; it is full of compassion and produces a harvest of good deeds; it is free from prejudice and hypocrisy. }
{\*\cs4\super 18}
{And goodness is the harvest that is produced from the seeds the peacemakers plant in peace.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Friendship with the World}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 4}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{Where do all the fights and quarrels among you come from? They come from your desires for pleasure, which are constantly fighting within you. }
{\*\cs4\super 2}
{You want things, but you cannot have them, so you are ready to kill; you strongly desire things, but you cannot get them, so you quarrel and fight. You do not have what you want because you do not ask God for it. }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{And when you ask, you do not receive it, because your motives are bad; you ask for things to use for your own pleasures. }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{Unfaithful people! Don't you know that to be the world's friend means to be God's enemy? If you want to be the world's friend, you make yourself God's enemy. }
{\*\cs4\super 5}
{Don't think that there is no truth in the scripture that says, \uc0\u8220 The spirit that God placed in us is filled with fierce desires.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs33\b\super q}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{q}{b }{\*\cs51\b The spirit...fierce desires; }{or }{\*\cs51\b God yearns jealously over the spirit that he placed in us.}}
{ }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{\*\cs33\b\super r}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{r}{- Pro 3.34 (LXX).}}
{ But the grace that God gives is even stronger. As the scripture says, \uc0\u8220 God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.\uc0\u8221 }
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 7}
{So then, submit yourselves to God. Resist the Devil, and he will run away from you. }
{\*\cs4\super 8}
{Come near to God, and he will come near to you. Wash your hands, you sinners! Purify your hearts, you hypocrites! }
{\*\cs4\super 9}
{Be sorrowful, cry, and weep; change your laughter into crying, your joy into gloom! }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Warning against Judging One Another}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 11}
{Do not criticize one another, my friends. If you criticize or judge another Christian, you criticize and judge the Law. If you judge the Law, then you are no longer one who obeys the Law, but one who judges it. }
{\*\cs4\super 12}
{God is the only lawgiver and judge. He alone can save and destroy. Who do you think you are, to judge someone else?}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Warning against Boasting}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 13}
{\*\cs33\b\super s}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{s}{- Pro 27.1.}}
{ }
{\*\cs33\b\super t}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{t}{- }}
{ Now listen to me, you that say, \uc0\u8220 Today or tomorrow we will travel to a certain city, where we will stay a year and go into business and make a lot of money.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 14}
{You don't even know what your life tomorrow will be! You are like a puff of smoke, which appears for a moment and then disappears. }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{What you should say is this: \uc0\u8220 If the Lord is willing, we will live and do this or that.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 16}
{But now you are proud, and you boast; all such boasting is wrong.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 17}
{So then, if we do not do the good we know we should do, we are guilty of sin.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Warning to the Rich}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 5}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{And now, you rich people, listen to me! Weep and wail over the miseries that are coming upon you! }
{\*\cs4\super 2}
{\*\cs33\b\super u}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{u}{- Mat 6.19.}}
{ Your riches have rotted away, and your clothes have been eaten by moths. }
{\*\cs4\super 3}
{\*\cs33\b\super v}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{v}{- }}
{ Your gold and silver are covered with rust, and this rust will be a witness against you and will eat up your flesh like fire. You have piled up riches in these last days. }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{\*\cs33\b\super w}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{w}{- Deu 24.14,15.}}
{ You have not paid any wages to those who work in your fields. Listen to their complaints! The cries of those who gather in your crops have reached the ears of God, the Lord Almighty. }
{\*\cs4\super 5}
{Your life here on earth has been full of luxury and pleasure. You have made yourselves fat for the day of slaughter. }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{\*\cs33\b\super x}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{x}{- }}
{ You have condemned and murdered innocent people, and they do not resist you. }
{\*\cs33\b\super y}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{y}{c }{\*\cs51\b people, and they do not resist you; }{or }{\*\cs51\b people. Will God not resist you?}}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Patience and Prayer}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 7}
{Be patient, then, my friends, until the Lord comes. See how patient farmers are as they wait for their land to produce precious crops. They wait patiently for the autumn and spring rains. }
{\*\cs4\super 8}
{You also must be patient. Keep your hopes high, for the day of the Lord's coming is near.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 9}
{Do not complain against one another, my friends, so that God will not judge you. The Judge is near, ready to appear. }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{My friends, remember the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. Take them as examples of patient endurance under suffering. }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{\*\cs33\b\super z}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{z}{- a Job 1.21,22; 2.10; b Psa 103.8.}}
{ We call them happy because they endured. You have heard of Job's patience, and you know how the Lord provided for him in the end. For the Lord is full of mercy and compassion.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 12}
{\*\cs33\b\super a}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{a}{- Mat 5.34-37.}}
{ Above all, my friends, do not use an oath when you make a promise. Do not swear by heaven or by earth or by anything else. Say only \uc0\u8220 Yes\uc0\u8221  when you mean yes, and \uc0\u8220 No\uc0\u8221  when you mean no, and then you will not come under God's judgment.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 13}
{Are any among you in trouble? They should pray. Are any among you happy? They should sing praises. }
{\*\cs4\super 14}
{\*\cs33\b\super b}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{b}{- Mrk 6.13.}}
{ Are any among you sick? They should send for the church elders, who will pray for them and rub olive oil on them in the name of the Lord. }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{This prayer made in faith will heal the sick; the Lord will restore them to health, and the sins they have committed will be forgiven. }
{\*\cs4\super 16}
{\*\cs33\b\super c}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{c}{- }}
{ So then, confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you will be healed. The prayer of a good person has a powerful effect. }
{\*\cs4\super 17}
{\*\cs33\b\super d}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{d}{- 1Ki 17.1; 18.1 }}
{ Elijah was the same kind of person as we are. He prayed earnestly that there would be no rain, and no rain fell on the land for three and a half years. }
{\*\cs4\super 18}
{\*\cs33\b\super e}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{e}{- 1Ki 18.42-45.}}
{ Once again he prayed, and the sky poured out its rain and the earth produced its crops.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 19}
{My friends, if any of you wander away from the truth and another one brings you back again, }
{\*\cs4\super 20}
{\*\cs33\b\super f}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{f}{- Pro 10.12;  1Pe 4.8.}}
{ remember this: whoever turns a sinner back from the wrong way will save that sinner's soul }
{\*\cs33\b\super g}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{g}{d }{\*\cs51\b that sinner's soul; }{or }{\*\cs51\b his own soul.}}
{ from death and bring about the forgiveness of many sins.}
\par\pard\plain\s6\qc\sb720\sa240\sl-480\slmult0\f4\fs40\b{\*\cs84\fs28 The Letter from}
{\line JUDE}
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Introduction}
\par\pard\plain\s53\fi240\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{\*\cs75\i The Letter from Jude}
{ was written to warn against false teachers who claimed to be believers. In this brief letter, which is similar in content to }
{\*\cs75\i 2 Peter}
{ the writer encourages his readers \uc0\u8220 to fight on for the faith which once and for all God has given to his people.\uc0\u8221 }
\par\pard\plain\s26\ql\sb160\sa80\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs16\b{Outline of Contents}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Introduction (1-2)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Character, teaching, and doom of the false teachers (3-16)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Admonition to keep the faith (17-23)}
\par\pard\plain\s59\fi-720\lin720\sl-220\slmult0\f4\fs18{Benediction (24-25)}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs2 1}
{\*\cs4\super 1}
{\*\cs33\b\super a}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{a}{- Mat 13.55; Mrk 6.3.}}
{ From Jude, servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James\uc0\u8212 }
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{To those who have been called by God, who live in the love of God the Father and the protection of Jesus Christ:}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 2}
{May mercy, peace, and love be yours in full measure.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{False Teachers}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 3}
{My dear friends, I was doing my best to write to you about the salvation we share in common, when I felt the need of writing at once to encourage you to fight on for the faith which once and for all God has given to his people. }
{\*\cs4\super 4}
{For some godless people have slipped in unnoticed among us, persons who distort the message about the grace of our God in order to excuse their immoral ways, and who reject Jesus Christ, our only Master and Lord. Long ago the Scriptures predicted the condemnation they have received.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 5}
{\*\cs33\b\super b}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{b}{- a Exo 12.51; b Num 14.29,30.}}
{ For even though you know all this, I want to remind you of how the Lord }
{\*\cs33\b\super c}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{c}{a }{\*\cs51\b the Lord; }{some manuscripts have }{\*\cs51\b Jesus, }{which in Greek is the same as }{\*\cs51\b Joshua.}}
{ once rescued the people of Israel from Egypt, but afterward destroyed those who did not believe. }
{\*\cs4\super 6}
{Remember the angels who did not stay within the limits of their proper authority, but abandoned their own dwelling place: they are bound with eternal chains in the darkness below, where God is keeping them for that great Day on which they will be condemned. }
{\*\cs4\super 7}
{\*\cs33\b\super d}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{d}{- Gen 19.1-24.}}
{ Remember Sodom and Gomorrah, and the nearby towns, whose people acted as those angels did and indulged in sexual immorality and perversion: they suffer the punishment of eternal fire as a plain warning to all.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 8}
{In the same way also, these people have visions which make them sin against their own bodies; they despise God's authority and insult the glorious beings above. }
{\*\cs4\super 9}
{\*\cs33\b\super e}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{e}{- a Dan 10.13,21; 12.1; Rev 12.7; b Deu 34.6; c Zec 3.2.}}
{ Not even the chief angel Michael did this. In his quarrel with the Devil, when they argued about who would have the body of Moses, Michael did not dare condemn the Devil with insulting words, but said, \uc0\u8220 The Lord rebuke you!\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 10}
{But these people attack with insults anything they do not understand; and those things that they know by instinct, like wild animals, are the very things that destroy them. }
{\*\cs4\super 11}
{\*\cs33\b\super f}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{f}{- a Gen 4.3-8; b Num 22.1-35; c Num 16.1-35.}}
{ How terrible for them! They have followed the way that Cain took. For the sake of money they have given themselves over to the error that Balaam committed. They have rebelled as Korah rebelled, and like him they are destroyed. }
{\*\cs4\super 12}
{With their shameless carousing they are like dirty spots in your fellowship meals. They take care only of themselves. They are like clouds carried along by the wind, but bringing no rain. They are like trees that bear no fruit, even in autumn, trees that have been pulled up by the roots and are completely dead. }
{\*\cs4\super 13}
{They are like wild waves of the sea, with their shameful deeds showing up like foam. They are like wandering stars, for whom God has reserved a place forever in the deepest darkness.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 14}
{\*\cs33\b\super g}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{g}{- Gen 5.18,21-24.}}
{ It was Enoch, the seventh }
{\*\cs33\b\super h}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{h}{b }{\*\cs52\b seventh: }{This numbering includes both the first and the last in the series of seven names from Adam to Enoch.}}
{ direct descendant from Adam, who long ago prophesied this about them: \uc0\u8220 The Lord will come with many thousands of his holy angels }
{\*\cs4\super 15}
{to bring judgment on all, to condemn them all for the godless deeds they have performed and for all the terrible words that godless sinners have spoken against him!\uc0\u8221 }
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 16}
{These people are always grumbling and blaming others; they follow their own evil desires; they brag about themselves and flatter others in order to get their own way.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Warnings and Instructions}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 17}
{But remember, my friends, what you were told in the past by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. }
{\*\cs4\super 18}
{\*\cs33\b\super i}
{\footnote \pard\plain \s34\fi240\sl200\f4\fs16{i}{- 2Pe 3.3.}}
{ They said to you, \uc0\u8220 When the last days come, people will appear who will make fun of you, people who follow their own godless desires.\uc0\u8221  }
{\*\cs4\super 19}
{These are the people who cause divisions, who are controlled by their natural desires, who do not have the Spirit. }
{\*\cs4\super 20}
{But you, my friends, keep on building yourselves up on your most sacred faith. Pray in the power of the Holy Spirit, }
{\*\cs4\super 21}
{and keep yourselves in the love of God, as you wait for our Lord Jesus Christ in his mercy to give you eternal life.}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 22}
{Show mercy toward those who have doubts; }
{\*\cs4\super 23}
{save others by snatching them out of the fire; and to others show mercy mixed with fear, but hate their very clothes, stained by their sinful lusts.}
\par\pard\plain\s5\qc\sb160\sa80\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs18\b{Prayer of Praise}
\par\pard\plain\s7\fi240\sl-240\slmult0\f4\fs20{\*\cs4\super 24}
{To him who is able to keep you from falling and to bring you faultless and joyful before his glorious presence\uc0\u8212  }
{\*\cs4\super 25}
{to the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, might, and authority, from all ages past, and now, and forever and ever! Amen.}
}
